docs/explanation/plugin-system.md, before:

# Plugin system

Redsun's plugin system allows third-party packages to provide devices, presenters, and views that are dynamically discovered and loaded at runtime.

## Overview

Plugins are standard Python packages that register themselves via [entry points]. When Redsun builds an application from a YAML configuration file, it uses these entry points to discover available plugins and load the requested components.

```mermaid
graph TB
    Config[YAML config] -->|references| Plugins
    Plugins -->|discovered via| EntryPoints[entry points]
    EntryPoints -->|load| Manifest[plugin manifest]
    Manifest -->|resolves to| Classes[component classes]
    Classes -->|registered in| Container[AppContainer]
```

## Plugin discovery

When [`AppContainer.from_config()`][redsun.containers.container.AppContainer.from_config]
is called with a configuration file, Redsun:

1. **Reads the configuration** - parses the YAML file to determine which devices, presenters, and views are needed.
2. **Queries entry points** - looks up installed packages registered under the `redsun.plugins` entry point group.
3. **Loads manifests** - each plugin provides a YAML manifest file that maps plugin IDs to their Python class locations.
4. **Validates protocols** - each loaded class is checked against the expected protocol (Device, Presenter, or View).
5. **Creates the container** - a dynamic container class is assembled with the discovered components.

## Plugin manifest

Each plugin package includes a YAML manifest file that declares the available components:

```yaml
devices:
  my_motor:
    class: "my_plugin.devices:MyMotor"

presenters:
  my_controller:
    class: "my_plugin.presenters:MyController"

views:
  my_ui:
    class: "my_plugin.views:MyView"
```

The manifest is registered as a [Python entry point] in the plugin's `pyproject.toml`:

```toml
[project.entry-points."redsun.plugins"]
my-plugin = "manifest.yaml"
```

## Configuration file format

The application configuration file references plugins by name and ID:

```yaml
schema: 1.0
session: "My Experiment"
frontend: "pyqt"

devices:
  motor:
    plugin_name: my-plugin
    plugin_id: my_motor
    axis:
      - X
      - Y

presenters:
  controller:
    plugin_name: my-plugin
    plugin_id: my_controller

views:
  ui:
    plugin_name: my-plugin
    plugin_id: my_ui
```

The `plugin_name` and `plugin_id` keys are used for plugin resolution and are not passed to the component constructors. All other keys become keyword arguments for the component.

## Protocol validation

Before a plugin class is used, Redsun verifies it implements the expected protocol:

- **Devices** must be subclasses of [`Device`][sunflare.device.Device] or implement `read_configuration`, `describe_configuration`, `name`, and `parent`.
- **Presenters** must be subclasses of [`Presenter`][sunflare.presenter.Presenter] or have `devices` and `virtual_bus` attributes.
- **Views** must be subclasses of [`View`][sunflare.view.View] or have a `virtual_bus` attribute.

Classes that satisfy the protocol structurally (without inheriting from the base class) are registered as virtual subclasses via [`ABCMeta.register()`][abc.ABCMeta.register].

## Inline vs. config-based registration

The plugin system is used when building from configuration files via
[`AppContainer.from_config()`][redsun.containers.container.AppContainer.from_config].
When using the declarative class-based approach (defining a container subclass with
[`component()`][redsun.containers.components.component] fields), component classes are
specified directly through type annotations and do not go through plugin discovery.

Both approaches produce the same result: an
[`AppContainer`][redsun.containers.container.AppContainer] with registered device,
presenter, and view components ready to be built.

[entry points]: https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/entry-points/
[python entry point]: https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/entry-points/

Commit message:

refactor: component() accepts class as first positional argument
Remove the type-hint resolution machinery from AppContainerMeta.__new__:
- get_type_hints(), sys._getframe() fallback, and annotation scanning are
  all gone. The component class is now carried directly on _ComponentField
  and used immediately when building the wrapper.

API change:
  Before: motor: MyMotor = component(layer="device", ...)
  After:  motor = component(MyMotor, layer="device", ...)

The type annotation is no longer required by the framework; it may still
be added for the benefit of static type checkers, but has no runtime
effect.

Public API:
- AppContainer and component are now importable directly from redsun:
    from redsun import AppContainer, component
- RedSunConfig removed from public API (redsun.containers.__all__ and
  redsun.__init__); it is an internal TypedDict used only to validate
  YAML configuration files and not useful to plugin authors.

Tests:
- Updated to new component(cls, ...) call style throughout
- Restored mixed-style test using direct _PresenterComponent wrapper
- Added TestTopLevelImports: covers top-level import paths and asserts
  RedSunConfig is not exposed in the public API
- Updated docstrings and docs/explanation/ to reflect new API

docs/explanation/plugin-system.md, after:

# Plugin system

Redsun's plugin system allows third-party packages to provide devices, presenters, and views that are dynamically discovered and loaded at runtime.

## Overview

Plugins are standard Python packages that register themselves via [entry points]. When Redsun builds an application from a YAML configuration file, it uses these entry points to discover available plugins and load the requested components.

```mermaid
graph TB
    Config[YAML config] -->|references| Plugins
    Plugins -->|discovered via| EntryPoints[entry points]
    EntryPoints -->|load| Manifest[plugin manifest]
    Manifest -->|resolves to| Classes[component classes]
    Classes -->|registered in| Container[AppContainer]
```

## Plugin discovery

When [`AppContainer.from_config()`][redsun.containers.container.AppContainer.from_config]
is called with a configuration file, Redsun:

1. **Reads the configuration** - parses the YAML file to determine which devices, presenters, and views are needed.
2. **Queries entry points** - looks up installed packages registered under the `redsun.plugins` entry point group.
3. **Loads manifests** - each plugin provides a YAML manifest file that maps plugin IDs to their Python class locations.
4. **Validates protocols** - each loaded class is checked against the expected protocol (Device, Presenter, or View).
5. **Creates the container** - a dynamic container class is assembled with the discovered components.

## Plugin manifest

Each plugin package includes a YAML manifest file that declares the available components:

```yaml
devices:
  my_motor:
    class: "my_plugin.devices:MyMotor"

presenters:
  my_controller:
    class: "my_plugin.presenters:MyController"

views:
  my_ui:
    class: "my_plugin.views:MyView"
```

The manifest is registered as a [Python entry point] in the plugin's `pyproject.toml`:

```toml
[project.entry-points."redsun.plugins"]
my-plugin = "manifest.yaml"
```

## Configuration file format

The application configuration file references plugins by name and ID:

```yaml
schema: 1.0
session: "My Experiment"
frontend: "pyqt"

devices:
  motor:
    plugin_name: my-plugin
    plugin_id: my_motor
    axis:
      - X
      - Y

presenters:
  controller:
    plugin_name: my-plugin
    plugin_id: my_controller

views:
  ui:
    plugin_name: my-plugin
    plugin_id: my_ui
```

The `plugin_name` and `plugin_id` keys are used for plugin resolution and are not passed to the component constructors. All other keys become keyword arguments for the component.

## Protocol validation

Before a plugin class is used, Redsun verifies it implements the expected protocol:

- **Devices** must be subclasses of [`Device`][sunflare.device.Device] or implement `read_configuration`, `describe_configuration`, `name`, and `parent`.
- **Presenters** must be subclasses of [`Presenter`][sunflare.presenter.Presenter] or have `devices` and `virtual_bus` attributes.
- **Views** must be subclasses of [`View`][sunflare.view.View] or have a `virtual_bus` attribute.

Classes that satisfy the protocol structurally (without inheriting from the base class) are registered as virtual subclasses via [`ABCMeta.register()`][abc.ABCMeta.register].

## Inline vs. config-based registration

The plugin system is used when building from configuration files via
[`AppContainer.from_config()`][redsun.containers.container.AppContainer.from_config].
When using the declarative class-based approach (defining a container subclass with
[`component()`][redsun.containers.components.component] fields), component classes are
passed directly as the first argument to `component()` and do not go through plugin discovery.

Both approaches produce the same result: an
[`AppContainer`][redsun.containers.container.AppContainer] with registered device,
presenter, and view components ready to be built.

[entry points]: https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/entry-points/
[python entry point]: https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/entry-points/
